                   Due: Oct 6, 2017 at 11:59pm

CS 480
Fall 2017
Dr. Duric


                          Homework #2 (25p)

Your first assignment will be to write a Lisp program for solving of
n-Queens/tokens problem. The objective is to place n queens/tokens on a nxn
board: no two queens/tokens are allowed to be in the same row, column, or a
diagonal.

You can represent a board configuration with a simple n element list
(c1 c2 c3 c4 ... cn), ci corresponds to the column position of i-th
queen in the i-th row. For example, (1 3 2 4) would correspond to the
4 queens in positions (1,1) (row 1, column 1), (2,3) (row 2, column
3), (3,2) (row 3, column 2), and (4,4) (row 4, column 4). Note that in
our representation we do not use double indexes: the i-th queen is
placed in the i-th row and its column index is ci. Note: If you want
to write a faster program you can use a vector (or array) to represent
your board position. You should worry about faster implementation only
after you are absolutely sure that you can solve the problem using a
(easier to write and debug) list implementation.

Your homework will have three parts. In the first part you will write
A function for checking whether an arbitrary permutation of n numbers 
solves n-queens problem. In the second part you will write a program to
generate all solutions of n-queens for (n=4,5, …,10). You should only 
display solution for n<6 and report how many solutions there are for n>=6.
In the third part you will write a more efficient implementation that will 
search for a single placement of n-queens on the board. A detailed 
description of the problem follows.

Part 1. (5p) 
You can write a function that checks if a board is
legal. A legal board configuration cannot have two queens in
the same column or diagonal. Two queens ci and cj (in rows i and j)
share a column if ci=cj; they share a diagonal if |ci-cj|=|i-j|,
where i,j=1,2,3,4 and |x| is the absolute value of x. Note that if you use
permutations as potential board configurations then you only need to check
if queens share a diagonal.

Part 2: (10p) 
Generate configurations that correspond to permutations of 1..n. 
For example, (1,2,3,4) would have 24 permutations, 1..5 would have 120, 
1..n would have n! (=1*2*3*...*n). You can generate all permutations of 
numbers 1..2 by starting from ((1)) and inserting 2 in all possible 
positions to obtain ((2 1) (1 2)). Similarly, you obtain all permutations 
of 1..3 by starting from ((2 1) (1 2)) and inserting 3 in all possible 
positions in each of the length-two lists to obtain ((3 2 1) (2 3 1) 
(2 1 3) (3 1 2) (1 3 2) (1 2 3)). Similarly, given all permutations of 
1..n-1 you can create all permutations of 1..n. Hint: Use 'subseq' lisp 
function. Can you solve n-queens for n=4 . . .,10? How about n>10? How many 
solutions to n-queens are there for n>=4? 

Part 3: (10p) In this part you will generate random permutations of n queens and
check if they correspond to legal boards. You can stop as soon as you find a legal
position. You will start by writing a function 'shuffle' that takes a list 
(1 2 3 ... n) and returns a list with the same elements in a random order (5p for 
this part). To generate a random shuffle you pick one number from (1…n) at random and 
move it to a new list, then you pick another number randomly from the shortened list and
add it to the new list. Continue until you have moved all numbers from the old 
list to the new one. You will then run this list for increasing values of n to obtain solutions 
of the n-queens problem. How many times do you need to shuffle to obtain solutions for
n=4,...,10? Do you get the same answer for different runs? 
Can your program handle n=11,12,13,14,15,...?  How large n can your program handle?

Hints: See the slide show attached with the homework if you wish to learn more about permutations
and/or want to make an efficient implementation of the permutation generation method.

Instructions for submission:
----------------------------

(1) Using script or dribble, you are to capture the output of a Lisp session
    in which you successfully load and execute your code, showing sufficient
    testing of your function(s). of execution of each of your functions. You 
    will attach these results in your email (see next step) as “output.txt”

(2) Send a SINGLE email to ple13@gmu.edu formatted in the following way:
 
       - the subject field of the email should read: CS480:HW2
 
       - Please attach your lisp file in the email. The file should be called “yourNetIDHW2.lisp” where your netID is the first part of your GMU email (mine would be “zduricHW2.lisp”.  The body should include:
 
         Your GMU net id
   Your name
         Homework #2 
     As a safety precaution, always CC yourself when you submit homework
     this way and keep it around until it has been graded and
         returned.

     FINAL NOTE: we will test all code using MOSS. 
 